The Art of Dying





Published by Jaico Publishing House

A-2 Jash Chambers, 7-A Sir Phirozshah Mehta Road

Fort, Mumbai - 400 001

jaicopub@jaicobooks.com

www.jaicobooks.com

Copyright © 1976, 2017 OSHO International Foundation.

All rights reserved

www.osho.com



THE ART OF DYING

ISBN 978-81-8495-966-6

First Jaico Impression: 2017

No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without prior written permission from OSHO International Foundation.

The material in this book is a transcript of a series of original OSHO Talks, The Art of Dying, given to a live audience. All of Osho’s talks have been published in full as books, and are also available as original audio recordings. Audio recordings and the complete text archive can be found via the online OSHO Library at www.osho.com/library

Photos of Osho: Courtesy OSHO International Foundation

OSHO is a registered trademark of OSHO International Foundation, used under license. www.osho.com/trademarks





THE

ART OF

DYING

EXPLORING THE MYSTERIES OF

LIFE AND DEATH


OSHO





JAICO PUBLISHING HOUSE

AhmedabadBangaloreBhopalBhubaneswarChennai

DelhiHyderabadKolkataLucknowMumbai


Preface


Death is an illusion. It is always somebody else who dies; you never die. It means death has always been seen from the outside, it is the outsider’s view. Those who have seen their inner world are unanimous in saying that there is no death.

You don’t know what constitutes your consciousness; it is not constituted of breathing, it is not constituted of heartbeats, it is not constituted of blood circulation. So when the doctor says that a man is dead, it is an outsider’s conclusion; all that he is saying is, “This man is no longer breathing, his pulse has stopped, his heart is not beating.” Are these three things equivalent to death? They are not.

Consciousness is not your body, nor your mind, nor your heart.

So when a person dies, he dies for you, not for himself. For himself he simply changes the house, perhaps moves into a better apartment. But because the old apartment is left, and you are searching for him in the old apartment and you don’t find him there, you think the poor guy is dead. All that you should say is, “The poor guy escaped. Now where he has gone, we don’t know.”

In fact, medical science is going beyond its limits when it says that some person is dead. Medical science has no right yet, because it has no definition yet of what constitutes death. It can simply say, “This man is no longer breathing. His heart has stopped. His pulse is no longer functioning.” To conclude that he is dead is going beyond what you are seeing. But because science does not have any idea of consciousness, the death of the body becomes the death of the being.

Those who have known the being… And it is not necessary that you should die and then you know; you can just go inside. That’s what I call meditation – just go inside and find out what is your center, and at your center there is no breathing, there is no heartbeat, there is no thought, no mind, no heart, no body, and still you are.

Once a person has experienced himself – that he is not the body, not the mind, not the heart, but pure awareness – he knows there is no death for him, because he does not depend on the body.

Osho

Beyond Enlightenment





Introduction

Every few thousand years an individual appears who irrevocably changes the world around him in ways that are never immediately apparent, except to the most perceptive.

Osho is one such individual: his spoken words will resonate for centuries to come.

All those words have been recorded and transcribed into books like this one; written words that can carry a transforming message to the reader.

For Osho, all change is individual. There is no ‘society’ to change – it can only happen to each one of us, one at a time. So, no matter what the subject matter of the book, the thread that runs through all Osho’s words is like a love song that we can suddenly, mysteriously, hear at just the right moment. And strangely, no matter what the words seem to be referring to, they are really only referring to us.

And this is no ordinary love song; it is more an invitation to open our hearts to hear something beyond the words, beyond the heart…a silence beyond all understanding. Where we all belong.





Contents





Preface

Introduction

Chapter 1Know How to Live

Chapter 2With Nothing to Lose

Chapter 3Walking the Tightrope

Chapter 4Let It Be So

Chapter 5Having and Being

Chapter 6The Art of Living

Chapter 7The Treasure

Chapter 8Only the Knower Is Left

Chapter 9Belong to the Transcendent

Chapter 10Beyond East and West

About Osho

OSHO International Meditation Resort

Books by Osho in English Language

For More Information
