ON THE WAY TO INTIMACY
RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS
    People ask questions that make them feel very knowledgeable. They want to ask
    questions not to get the answer, but just to show their knowledge. But I am a
    crazy person: I never answer those questions that come out of your
    knowledge. I simply throw them away.
         I only answer questions that open up your wounds because once your
    wounds are open, there is a possibility of healing. Once you expose yourself,
    you are on the way of transformation. And unless you show your real face, it
    is impossible to make any changes in your life, any transformations in your
    consciousness.




Why do I find attractive people frightening?


Attractive people are frightening for many reasons. First, the more attractive a person
is to you, the more there is the possibility of falling into her or his bondage—that is
the fear. You will be possessed, you will be reduced to a slave by the charm, the
magnetism, the magic. Attractive people are attracting and yet frightening. They are
beau-

                                          140
                        On The Way To Intimacy: Responses To Questions

tiful; you would like to relate with them, but to relate with them means to lose your freedom.
To relate with them means not to be yourself anymore. And because they are attractive, you
will not be able to leave them; you will cling. You know your tendency—that the more at-
tractive a person is, the more clinging will arise in you; you will become more and more
dependent. That is the fear.
     Nobody wants to become dependent. Freedom is the ultimate value. Even love is not
higher than freedom. Freedom is the ultimate value; next to it is love. And there is a constant
conflict between love and freedom. Love tries to become the ultimate value. It is not. And
love tries to destroy freedom; only then can it be the ultimate value. And those who love
freedom become afraid of love.
     And love means to be attracted to an attractive person. And the more beautiful the
person is, the more you feel attracted, the more fear will arise because now you are going
into something from where escape will not be easy. You can escape from an ordinary
person, a homely person, more easily. And if the person is ugly, you are free; you need not
become too dependent.


     Mulla Nasruddin married the ugliest woman in the town. Nobody could believe it.
     People asked him, "Nasruddin, what has happened to you?"
          He said, "There is a logic in it. This is the only woman from whom I can
     escape any time. In fact, it will be difficult not to escape. This is the only woman
     in the town whom I can trust. Beautiful people are not trustworthy. They can fall
     in love easily because so many people are attracted to them. I can trust this
     woman; she will always be sincere toward me. I need not be worried about her; I
     can go out of town for months; I will not have any fear. My woman will remain
     mine."


                                              141
                                          Intimacy
    Just see the point: If the person is ugly, you can possess the person. The ugly person
will depend on you. If the person is beautiful, the beautiful person will possess you. Beauty
is power, it is tremendous power.
     The ugly person will become a slave, a servant. The ugly person will in every way
substitute for the beauty that is missing in him or her. The ugly woman will be a better wife
than a beautiful woman— she will have to be. She will take more care of you, she will be a
better nurse—because she knows that beauty is missing and something has to be provided
instead. She will be very good to you; she will never nag you, she will never fight with you,
she will not be in a constant quarrel with you—she cannot afford it.
     Beautiful persons are dangerous. They can afford to fight. So these are the reasons.
     You ask me, "Why do I find attractive people frightening?"
     They are. Unless you understand and become aware, this fear remains. Attraction/fear
are two aspects of the same phenomenon. You are always attracted to the same person with
whom you feel a great fear. Fear means you will be secondary.
     In fact, people want the impossible. A woman wants a man, the most beautiful, the most
powerful man in the world—but also wants him to remain interested only in her. Now, this is
an impossible demand. The most beautiful and the most powerful person is bound to be
interested in many more people. And many more people will be interested in him. The man
would like to have the most beautiful woman in the world, but also would like her to remain
very faithful to him, devoted to him. That will be difficult; that is asking the impossible.
     And remember: If some woman looks very beautiful to you, that simply shows you are
not very beautiful. And you are afraid also—if




                                               142
                        On The Way To Intimacy: Responses To Questions



 the woman looks so beautiful to you, what is happening from the other side? You will not
 be looking so beautiful to her. There is fear—she may leave you. All these problems are
 there. But these problems arise only because your love is not really love but a game. If it is
 really love, then it never thinks of the future. Then there is no problem of the future.
 Tomorrow does not exist for real love; time does not exist for real love.
      If you love a person, you love a person. What will happen tomorrow—who cares?
 Today is so much, this moment is an eternity. What will happen tomorrow, we will see . . .
 when tomorrow comes. And tomorrow never comes. Real love is of the present.
      Always remember: Anything real has to be part of awareness, has to be part of the
 present, has to be part of meditation. Then there is no problem! And there is no question of
 attraction, and there is no question of fear.
      Real love shares; it is not to exploit the other, it is not to possess the other. When you
 want to possess the other, then the problem arises: The other may possess you. And if the
 other is more powerful, more magnetic, naturally you will be a slave. If you want to
 become the master of the other, then the fear arises that "I may be reduced to a slave." If
 you don't want to possess the other, then the fear never arises that the other may possess
 you. Love never possesses.
     Love never possesses and love can never be possessed. True love leads you into
freedom. Freedom is the highest peak, the ultimate value. And love is closest to freedom; the
next step after love is free- dom. Love is not against freedom; love is a stepping-stone toward
freedom. That's what awareness will make clear to you: that love has to be used as a
stepping-stone for freedom. If you love, you make the other free. And when you make the
other free, you are made free by the other.


                                                 143
                                          Intimacy

     Love is a sharing, not an exploitation. And in fact love never thinks in terms of ugliness
and beauty, either- You will be surprised: Love never thinks in terms of ugliness and beauty.
Love only acts, reflects, meditates—-it never thinks at all. Yes, sometimes it happens that
you fit with somebody—suddenly, everything falls in harmony. It is not a question of beauty
or ugliness. It is a question of harmony, a rhythm.
     Somebody has asked a question about what George Gurdjieff used to say, that for every
man there is a corresponding woman somewhere on the earth, and for every woman there is
a corresponding man somewhere on the earth. Each one is born with the polar opposite. If
you can find the other, everything will fall in harmony immediately. All their centers
function harmoniously—that is love. It is a very rare phenomenon. It is very rare to find a
couple who really fit together. Our society exists with such taboos, such inhibitions, that it is
almost impossible to find the real mate, the real friend.
     In Eastern mythology we have a story, a beautiful myth, that in the beginning when the
world was created, each child was born not alone but as a couple: one boy, one girl, together,
from the same mother. Twins, fitting with each other totally—that was the couple. They
were in tune in every way with each other. Then man fell from grace—just like the idea of
the original sin—and as a punishment couples were no longer born from the same mother.
Still, they are born! Gurdjieff is right—that's my own observation, too. Each person has a
divine mate somewhere. But to find them is very difficult because you may be white and
your opposite polarity may be black; you may be a Hindu and your opposite polarity may be
a Mohammedan; you may be Chinese and the opposite polarity may be German.
     In a better world, people will search and seek—and unless you can find the real person
who can fit with you, you will remain in a kind of tension, anguish. If you are alone you are
in anguish; if you


                                               144
                         On The Way To Intimacy: Responses To Questions

meet the other person, you are in anguish if the other person does not fit with you or only fits
so far. Now, through scientific investigation this has also been found: that there are people
who fit, and there are people who don't fit. Scientific arrangements can be made now; each
person can declare his centers, his birth chart, his rhythm. Now there is every possibility to
find the other person who fits exactly. The world has become very small, and once you have
found the other person . . . it is not a question of beauty and ugliness at all.
     In fact, there is nobody who is ugly and nobody who is beautiful. The ugly person may
fit with somebody—then the ugly person is beautiful for that person. Beauty is a shadow of
harmony. It is not that you fall in love with a beautiful person; the process is just the
opposite. When you fall in love with some person, the person looks beautiful. It is love that
brings the idea of beauty in, not vice versa.
     But it is rare to find a person who totally fits with you. Whenever somebody is
fortunate enough, life is lived with a melody; then there are two bodies and one soul. That is
a real couple. And whenever you can find that kind of couple, there will be great grace and
great music around them, a great aura, beautiful light, a silence. And love then naturally
leads into meditation.
     People should be allowed to meet and mix to find each other. People should not be in a
hurry to get married. The hurry is dangerous; it only brings divorces, or it brings a life of
long, long misery. Children should be allowed to meet with each other, and we should drop
all pre-technological taboos, inhibitions; they are no longer relevant.
     We are living in a post-technological age; man has become mature, and he has to
change many things because many things are wrong. They were developed in the old days; it
was a necessity then—it is no longer a necessity. For example, now people can live together,
men and women; there is no need to be in a hurry to get married. And if




                                                145
                                         Intimacy
you have known many men and many women, only then will you know who fits with you
and who does not fit. It is not a question of a long nose or a beautiful face; somebody may
have a beautiful face and you feel attracted, and may have beautiful eyes and big eyes and
you feel attracted, and the color of the hair ... but these things don't matter! When you live
together, after two days you will not note the color of the hair, and after three days you will
not note the length of the nose; and after three weeks you will have completely forgotten
about the physiology of the other. Now the reality impinges upon you. Now the real thing
will be spiritual harmony.
     Marriage up to now has been a very ugly affair. And priests were happy to allow it—
not only happy to allow it, they were the ones who invented it. And there was some reason
why priests all over the world have been in favor of this ugly marriage that has been on the
earth for five thousand years. The reason was that if people are miserable, only then do they
go to the churches, to the temples; if people are miserable, only then are they ready to
renounce life. If people are miserable, only then are they in the hands of the priests! A happy
humanity will have nothing to do with the priests. Obviously. If you are healthy, you have
nothing to do with the doctor. If you are psychologically whole, you have nothing to do with
the psychoanalyst. If you are spiritually whole, you will have nothing to do with the priest.
     And the greatest spiritual disharmony is created by marriage. Priests have created hell
on the earth. That is their trade secret—then people are bound to come to ask them what to
do. Life is so miserable! And then they can tell them how to get free of life. Then they can
give you rituals for how never to be born again, how to get out of the wheel of birth and
death. They have made life such a hell, and then they teach you how to get rid of it.
     My effort is just the opposite: I want to create heaven here now




                                              146
                          On The Way To Intimacy: Responses To Questions

so that there is no need to get rid of anything. There is no need to think of getting rid of birth
and death, and there is no need for the old so-called religions. More music is needed, more
poetry is needed, more art is needed. Certainly more mysticism is needed. More science is
needed. And then there will be a totally different kind of religion born, a new religion. A
religion that will not teach you antilife ideologies but will help you to live your life in more
harmony, more artistically, more sensitively, more centered, rooted in the earth. A religion
that will teach you the art of life, the philosophy of life, and will teach you how to be more
festive.
You ask, "Why do I find attractive people frightening?" Because deep down in you there is a
search, as there is in everybody, for the other pole, and you don't want to get involved with
somebody who may not be the other pole. But there is no other way to find the other pole
except by getting involved in many, many friendships, in many, many love affairs. If you
really want to find your beloved, you will have to go through many love affairs. That is the
only way to learn. Drop your fear. . . .
     And if you start associating with ugly people out of your fear of beautiful people, that is
not going to be satisfying to you.


     The Cohens were renting a furnished apartment. Mr- Cohen had found the place,
     which met with all his requirements, but Mrs. Cohen demurred: "I don't like this
     flat."
              "What's the matter, Rachel? Ain't it a fine flat? Why, it has all the latest
     improvements: washstands, decent lights, good plumbing, and hot and cold water.
     Why not?"
              "I know all what you say, but there are no curtains in the bathroom. Every
     time I take a bath, the neighbors can see me."


                                                147
                                           Intimacy

           "That's all right, Rachel If the neighbors see you, they will buy the curtains."


     Ugliness can have its uses, but it will not give you contentment. And if you are afraid
of beautiful people, then remember that you are really afraid of getting involved in a deep,
intimate relationship—that you want to keep a distance, that you want to keep a distance so
you can escape any time if the need arises. But this is not the way to go into it; this is not the
way to know the secrets of love. One has to go in absolute vulnerability. One has to drop all
armor and defense.
     If it is frightening, let it be frightening, but go into it. The fear will disappear. The only
way to drop any fear is to go into the very thing of which you are afraid. If somebody comes
to me and says, "I am afraid of darkness," then I always suggest to them, "The only way is to
go into the dark night, sit somewhere alone outside the town under a tree. Tremble! Perspire,
be nervous, but sit there! How long can you tremble? Slowly, slowly things will settle. The
heart will start beating normally . . . and suddenly you will see that darkness is not that
frightening, either. And slowly, slowly you will become aware of the beauties of darkness,
which only darkness can have—the depth, the silence, the velvety touch of it, the stillness,
the music of the dark night, the insects, the harmony. And slowly, as the fear disappears, you
will be surprised that darkness is not that dark, it has its own luminosity. You will be able to
start seeing something— vague, not clear. But clarity gives shallowness to things; vagueness
gives depth and mystery. Light can never be so mysterious as darkness. Light is prose;
darkness is poetry. Light is naked; hence, how long can you remain interested in it? But
darkness is veiled; it provokes great interest, great curiosity, to unveil it.
      If you are afraid of darkness, go into darkness. If you are afraid of


                                                 148
                          On The Way To Intimacy: Responses To Questions



love, go into love. If you are afraid of being alone, then go into the Himalayas and be alone.
That is the only way to drop it. And sometimes if you can deliberately do something, it
brings great awareness.
     Once a young man was brought to me—he was a professor in a college—and the
problem was that he walked like a woman. And to be in a university and to be a professor
and to walk like a woman is troublesome. He was very much embarrassed. And he had tried
all kinds of methods.
     I said, "Do one thing—because this is impossible, what you are doing; a man cannot
really walk like a woman. You are doing something like a miracle! Because to walk like a
woman means you have to have a womb in your belly; it is because of that roundness of the
womb that the woman walks in a different way. Her alignment of the body is different. But a
man really cannot walk like that—if a man can do it..." I told him, "This should be something
to be proud of! You are doing a miracle. Just show it to me."
     He said, "What do you mean, a miracle?"
     I said, "Just walk here in front of me, and walk like a woman."
     He tried and he failed. He could not walk like a woman. And I told him, "Now, this is
the key. Go back to the university—up to now you have been trying not to walk like a
woman. From now on try to walk like a woman with every deliberate effort. Your effort not
to walk like a woman has been the cause of the whole problem. It has become an obsession,
a hypnosis. You have hypnotized yourself. The only way to dehypnotize yourself is to do it
deliberately. Go to the university immediately," I told him, "and walk around, and try in
every possible way to show that you are a woman."
     He tried and he failed—and since then he has not succeeded.
     If you are afraid, remember that it is the same whether you are afraid of attractive
people or that nobody should touch your navel, or


                                              149
                                             Intimacy
you are afraid of darkness, or you are afraid of walking like a woman, or you are afraid of
this or that, XYZ, it doesn't matter. Fear has to be dissolved because fear is a crippling
process, a paralyzing process.
     And the only way to dissolve it is to go into it. Experience liberates. It is better to learn.
It is better to drop fear. It is better to relate with people. And, in fact, if you start relating, you
will find every person has something beautiful in her or him. Nobody comes without beauty
Maybe beauty has different dimensions—somebody's face is beautiful, somebody's voice is
beautiful, somebody's body is beautiful, somebody's mind is beautiful. Nobody comes
without beauty; existence gives to everybody some kind of beauty or other. There are as
many beauties as there are people.
     And the only way to contact the beauty of a person is to become intimate, to drop all
fear, to drop all defenses. And you will be surprised: God is expressed in different forms—
God is beauty.
     We have three words for God in the East: satyam—truth, shivam— the ultimate good,
sundram—the ultimate beauty. And beauty is the last—God is beautiful, God is beauty.
Wherever you find beauty, it is a reflection of God's beauty. And if you are afraid of the
reflection, how will you relate with the real? The reflection is there to learn the lesson so that
one day you can relate with the real.




Why do I feel self-conscious?


Freedom is the goal of life. Without freedom, life has no meaning at all. By freedom is not
meant any political, social, or economic freedom. By freedom it is meant freedom from time,
freedom from mind, freedom from desire. The moment the mind is no more, you are one
with the universe; you are as vast as the universe itself.


                                                  150
                          On The Way To Intimacy: Responses To Questions

        It is the mind that is the barrier between you and the reality, and because of this barrier,
you remain confined in a dark cell where no light ever reaches and where no joy can ever
penetrate. You live in misery because you are not meant to live in such a small, confined
space. Your being wants to expand to the very ultimate source of existence. Your being longs
to be oceanic, and you have become a dewdrop. How can you be happy? How can you be
blissful? Man lives in misery because man lives imprisoned.
        And Gautama the Buddha says that tanha—desire—is the root cause of all our misery
because desire creates the mind. Desire means creating future, projecting yourself in the
future, bringing tomorrow in. Bring the tomorrow in, and the today disappears, you cannot
see it any longer, your eyes are clouded by the tomorrow. Bring the tomorrow in, and you
will have to carry the load of all your yesterdays because the tomorrow can only be there if
the yesterdays go on nourishing it.
        Each desire is born out of the past, and each desire is projected in the future. The past
and the future, they constitute your whole mind. Analyze the mind, dissect it, and you will
find only two things: the past and the future. You will not find even an iota of the present,
not even a single atom. And the present is the only reality, the only existence, the only dance
there is.
        The present can be found only when mind has ceased utterly— when the past no longer
overpowers you and the future no more possesses you, when you are disconnected from the
memories and the imaginations. In that moment where are you? Who are you? In that
moment you are a nobody And nobody can hurt you when you are a nobody. You cannot be
wounded because the ego is very ready to receive wounds. The ego is almost seeking and
searching to be wounded; it exists through wounds. Its whole existence depends on misery,
pain.


                                                 151
                                          Intimacy
     When you are a nobody, anguish is impossible, anxiety is simply unbelievable. When
you are a nobody, there is great silence, stillness, no noise inside. Past gone, future
disappeared—what is there to create noise? And the silence that is heard is celestial, sacred.
For the first time, in those spaces of no-mind, you become aware of the eternal celebration
that goes on and on. That's what the existence is made of.
     Except man, the whole existence is blissful. Only man has fallen out of it, has gone
astray. Only man can do it because only man has consciousness.
     Now, consciousness has two possibilities: It can become a bright light in you, so bright
that even the sun will look pale compared to it-—Buddha says if a thousand suns have risen
suddenly, when you look within with no mind it is all light, eternal light. It is all joy, pure,
uncontaminated, unpolluted. It is simple bliss, innocent. It is wonder. Its majesty is
indescribable, its beauty inexpressible, and its benediction inexhaustible. Aes dhammo
sanantano—"so is the ultimate law."
     If you can only put your mind aside, you will become aware of the cosmic play. Then
you are only energy, and the energy is always here now, it never leaves the "herenow." That
is one possibility; you can become pure consciousness.
     The other possibility is you can become self-consciousness. Then you fall. Then you
become a separate entity from the world. Then you become an island, defined, well-defined.
Then you are confined because all definitions confine. Then you are in a prison cell, and the
prison cell is dark, utterly dark. There is no light, no possibility of light. And the prison cell
cripples you, paralyzes you.
     Self-consciousness becomes a bondage; the self is the bondage. And consciousness
becomes freedom.
     Drop the self and be conscious! That is the whole message, the message of all the
buddhas of all the ages, past, present, future. The
                                               152
                        On The Way To Intimacy: Responses To Questions



essential core of the message is very simple: Drop the self, the ego, the mind, and be.
     Just this moment when this silence pervades, who are you? A nobody, a nonentity. You
don't have a name, you don't have a form. You are neither man nor woman, neither Hindu
nor Mohammedan. You don't belong to any country, to any nation, to any race. You are not
the body, and you are not the mind.
     Then what are you? In this silence, what is your taste? How does it taste to be? Just a
peace, just a silence . . . and out of that peace and silence a great joy starts surfacing, welling
up, for no reason at all. It is your spontaneous nature.
     The art of putting the mind aside is the whole secret of religiousness because as you put
the mind aside, your being explodes into a thousand and one colors. You become a rainbow,
a lotus, a one-thousand-petaled lotus. Suddenly you open up, and then the whole beauty of
existence—which is infinite—is yours. Then all the stars in the sky are within you. Then
even the sky is not your limit; you no longer have any limits.
     Silence gives you a chance to melt, merge, disappear, evaporate. And when you are not,
you are; for the first time you are. When you are not, God is, nirvana is, enlightenment is.
When you are not, all is found. When you are, all is lost.
     Man has become a self-consciousness; that is his going astray, that is the original fall.
All the religions talk about the original fall in some way or other, but the best story is
contained in Christianity. The original fall is because man eats from the tree of knowledge.
When you eat of the tree of knowledge, the fruits of knowledge, it creates self-consciousness.
     The more knowledgeable you are, the more egoistic you are . . . hence the ego of the
scholars, pundits, maulvis. The ego becomes dec-




                                               153
                                         Intimacy
orated with great knowledge, scriptures, systems of thought. But they don't make you
innocent; they don't bring you the childlike quality of openness, of trust, of love, of
playfulness. Trust, love, playfulness, wonder all disappear when you become very
knowledgeable.
     And we are being taught to become knowledgeable. We are not taught to be innocent,
we are not taught how to feel the wonder of existence. We are told the names of the flowers,
but we are not taught how to dance around the flowers. We are told the names of the moun-
tains, but we are not taught how to commune with the mountains, how to commune with the
stars, how to commune with the trees, how to be in tune with existence.
     Out of tune, how can you be happy? Out of tune, you are bound to remain in anguish,
in great misery, in pain. You can be happy only when you are dancing with the dance of the
whole, when you are just a part of the dance, when you are just a part of this great orchestra,
when you are not singing your song separately Only then, in that melting, is man free.




How can I stay myself? I feel I lose myself when I get really close to people.


Everybody wants to become extraordinary. That is the search of the ego: to be someone who
is special, to be someone who is unique, incomparable. And this is the paradox: The more
you try to be exceptional, the more ordinary you look because everybody is after ex-
traordinariness. It is such an ordinary desire. If you become ordinary, the very search to be
ordinary is extraordinary because rarely does somebody want to be just nobody, rarely does
somebody want to be just a hollow, empty space.


                                              154
                        On The Way To Intimacy: Responses To Questions

      This is really extraordinary in a way because nobody wants it. And when you become
ordinary, you become extraordinary, and, of course, suddenly you discover that without
searching you have become unique.
      In fact, everybody is unique. If you can stop constantly running after goals for even a
single moment, you will realize that you are unique. It is nothing to be discovered; it is
already there. It is already the case: To be is to be unique. There is no other way of being.
Every leaf on a tree is unique, every pebble on the shore is unique; there is no other way of
being. You cannot find a similar pebble anywhere on the whole of the earth.
      Two similar things do not exist at all, so there is no need to be somebody. You just be
yourself, and suddenly you are unique, incomparable. That's why I say that this is a paradox:
Those who search fail, and those who don't bother, suddenly attain.
     But don't get confused in words. Let me repeat: The desire to be extraordinary is very
ordinary because everybody has it. And to have the understanding to be ordinary is very
extraordinary because it rarely happens. A Buddha, a Lao Tzu, a Jesus have it. To try to be
unique is on everybody's mind and all these people fail and fail utterly.
     How can you be more unique than you are already? Uniqueness is already there; you
have to discover it. You are not to invent it; it is hidden within you. You have to expose it to
existence, that's all. This uniqueness is not to be cultivated. It is your treasure. You have been
carrying it for ever and ever. It is your very being, your very core of being. You just have to
close your eyes and look at yourself. You have just to stop for a while and rest and look. But
you are running so fast, you are in such great haste to achieve it, that you will miss it.
      It is said by one of Lao Tzu's great disciples, Lieh Tzu, that once an idiot was
searching for fire with a candle in his hand. Said Lieh


                                               155
                                          Intimacy
Tzu: "Had he known what fire was, he could have cooked his rice sooner. He remained
hungry the whole night because he was searching for fire but couldn't find it, and he had a
candle in his hand. How can you search in the dark without a candle?"
     You are searching for uniqueness, and you have it in your hand. If you understand this,
you can cook your rice sooner. I have cooked my rice and I know. You are unnecessarily
hungry—the rice is there, the candle is there, the candle is fire. There is no need to take the
candle and search. If you take a candle in your hand, and you go on searching all over the
world, you will not find fire because you don't understand what fire is. Otherwise you would
have understood because the candle was just in front of you, you were holding it in your
hand.
     It happens sometimes to people who use glasses. They have their glasses on, and they
are searching for them. They may be in a hurry, and when they are in a hurry, they search
everywhere and they completely forget that they have the glasses on. One can get in a panic.
You may have had certain experiences like this in your life—because of the very search you
become so panicky and so worried and so disturbed that your vision is no longer clear, and
something that is just in front of you, you cannot see.
     This is the case. You need not search for uniqueness; you are unique already. There is
no way to make a thing more unique. The words "more unique" are absurd. Unique is
enough, there exists nothing like "more unique." It is just like the word circle. Circles exist—
there exists nothing like "more circular." That is absurd. A circle is always perfect; more is
not needed. There are no degrees of circularity. A circle is a circle; less and more are useless.
        Uniqueness is uniqueness; less and more don't apply to it. You are already unique. One
realizes this only when one is ready to become



                                               156
                        On The Way To Intimacy: Responses To Questions

ordinary. This is the paradox. But if you understand, there is no problem—the paradox is
there, and beautiful, and no problem exists. A paradox is not a problem. It looks like a
problem if you don't understand; if you understand, it is beautiful, a mystery.
       Become ordinary, and you will become extraordinary. Try to become extraordinary
and you will remain ordinary.
       What is it to give and what is it to receive? I understand now that I am only just
beginning to glimpse these. Receptiveness feels like dying to me, and automatically
everything inside goes on red alert. Help! Existence seems so huge.


I can understand what is troubling you. It is troubling almost everybody. It is good that you
have recognized it because now changing the situation is possible. Unfortunate are those who
are suffering from the same problem but are not aware of it; because of their unaware-ness,
there is no possibility of any transformation.
       You have taken courage to expose yourself. I am immensely glad about it. I want all
my people to be courageous enough to expose themselves, howsoever ugly it seems.
       The conditioning is to go on hiding the ugly and go on pretending about the beautiful.
That creates a schizophrenic situation: You go on showing yourself, what you are not; and
you go on repressing yourself, what you are. Your life becomes a continuous civil war. You
are fighting with yourself, and any fight with yourself is going to destroy you. Nobody can
win.
       If my right hand and left hand start fighting, do you think any hand can win? I can
manage sometimes to let the right hand feel good




                                                 151
                                           Intimacy

as a winner, and sometimes to change the situation and let the left hand feel it is the winner.
But neither can be really the winner because they both are my hands.
     Almost every human being is carrying a split personality. And the most significant fact
is that he identifies himself with the false part, and he denies his reality. In this situation you
cannot hope to grow up as a spiritual being.
     What the questioner is saying is tremendously important to understand. She is asking,
"What is it to give?" Have you ever asked yourself what it is to give? You think you are
already giving so much to your children, to your wife, to your girlfriend, to society, to the
Rotary Club, to the Lions Club—you are giving so much. But the fact is, you don't know
what it is to give.
     Unless you give yourself, you don't give at all.
     You can give money, but you are not the money. Unless you give yourself—that means
unless you give love—you don't know what giving is.
     "... and what is it to receive?" Almost everybody thinks he knows what it is to receive.
But the questioner is right in questioning and exposing herself, that she does not know what
it is to receive. Just as unless you give love you don't know what it is to give, the same is true
about receiving: Unless you are capable of receiving love, you don't know what it is to
receive. You want to be loved, but you have not thought about it: Are you capable of
receiving love? There are so many hindrances that won't allow you to receive it.
      The first is, you don't have any self-respect; hence when love comes toward you, you
don't feel yourself adequate enough to receive it. But you are in such a mess that you cannot
even see a simple fact: Because you have never accepted yourself as you are, you have never
loved yourself, how can you manage to receive somebody else's love?


                                                158
                        On The Way To Intimacy: Responses To Questions

You know you are not worthy of it, but you don't want to accept and recognize this stupid
idea that has been fed to you, that you are not worthy of it. So what do you do? You simply
refuse love. And to refuse love, you have to find excuses.
     The first and the most prominent excuse is, "It is not love—that's why I cannot accept
it." You cannot believe that somebody can love you. When you yourself cannot love you,
when you have not seen yourself, your beauty and your grace and your grandeur, how can
you believe it when somebody says, "You are beautiful. I can see in your eyes a depth,
unfathomable, of tremendous grace. I can see in your heart a rhythm, in tune with the
universe." You cannot believe all this; it is too much. You are accustomed to being
condemned, you are accustomed to being punished, you are accustomed to being rejected.
You are accustomed to not being accepted as you are—so these things you can take very
easily.
     Love will have a tremendous impact on you because you will have to go through a great
transformation before you can receive it. First you have to accept yourself without any guilt.
You are not a sinner as the Christians and other religions go on teaching you.
     You don't see the stupidity of the whole thing. Some guy far away in the past, one
Adam, disobeyed God, which is not much of a sin. In fact, he was absolutely right to disobey
him. If anybody had committed a sin, it was God, by prohibiting his own son, his own
daughter, from eating the fruit of knowledge and eating the fruit of eternal life. What kind of
father? What kind of God? What kind of love?
     Love demands that God should have told Adam and Eve, "Before you eat anything else,
these two trees have to be remembered. Eat as much from the tree of wisdom and eat as
much from the tree of eternal life as you like, so that you can also be in the same space of
immortality in which I am." That should be a simple thing for anyone who loves.


                                             159
                                          Intimacy
But God prohibiting Adam from wisdom means he wants him to remain ignorant. Perhaps he
is jealous, afraid, apprehensive that if Adam becomes wise, he will become equal to him. He
wants to keep Adam in his ignorance so that he remains inferior. And if he eats the fruit of
eternal life, then he will be a god himself.
     This God who prevented Adam and Eve must have been very jealous, utterly ugly,
inhuman, unloving. And if all these things are not sin, then what can sin be? But religions
have been teaching you, Jews and Christians and Mohammedans, that you are still carrying
the sin that Adam committed. There is a limit to stretching lies out so long. Even if Adam
had committed a sin, you cannot carry it. You were created by God, according to these
religions, and you are not carrying godliness, but you are carrying Adam and Eve's
disobedience?
     This is the Western way to condemn you—you are a sinner. The Eastern way comes to
the same conclusion but from different premises. They say everybody is loaded with
immense sin and evil deeds, committed in millions of past lives. In fact, the burden of a
Christian or a Jew or a Mohammedan is far less. You are only carrying the sin that Adam
and Eve committed. And it must have become very diluted— centuries upon centuries. You
are not a direct inheritor of Adam and Eve's sins. It has passed through many millions of
hands; by now the quantity must be almost homeopathic.
     But the Eastern concept is even more dangerous. You are not carrying somebody else's
sin. In the first place you cannot carry somebody else's sin. Your father commits a crime—
you cannot be sent to jail. Even ordinary human common sense will say that if the father has
committed the sin or the crime, he has to suffer. The son or the grandson cannot be sent to
the gallows because the grandfather committed a murder.
      But the Eastern concept is much more dangerous and poisonous:


                                               160
                        On The Way To Intimacy: Responses To Questions

It is your own sin that you are carrying, not that of Adam and Eve. And it is not a small
quantity; it has been growing with each life! And you have lived millions of lives before this
life, and in each life you have committed so many sins. They are all accumulated on your
chest. The burden is Himalayan; you are crushed under it.
     This is a strange strategy to destroy your dignity, to reduce you into a subhuman being.
How can you love yourself? You can hate, but you cannot love. How can you think that
somebody may be able to love you? It is better to reject it because sooner or later the person
who is offering you his love is going to discover your reality, which is very ugly—-just a
long, long burden of sin. And then that person is going to reject you. To avoid rejection, it is
better to reject love. That's why people don't accept love.
     They desire, they long for it. But when the moment comes and somebody is ready to
shower you with love, you shrink back. Your shrinking has a deep psychology. You are
afraid: This is beautiful, but how long will it last? Sooner or later my reality will be revealed.
It is better from the very beginning to be alert.
     Love means intimacy, love means two persons coming closer, love means two bodies
but one soul. You are afraid: Your soul? A sinner's soul, burdened with the evil deeds of
millions of lives? No, it is better to hide it; it is better not to come into a position where the
person who wanted to love you rejects you. It is the fear of rejection that does not allow you
to receive love.
     You cannot give love because nobody has ever told you that you are born a loving
being. They have told you, "You are born in sin!" You cannot love, and you cannot receive
love, either. This has diminished all possibilities of your growth.
     The questioner is saying, "I understand now that I am only just beginning to glimpse
these." You are fortunate because there are mil-


                                                161
                                           Intimacy

lions of people in the world who have become completely blind to their own conditionings,
the ugly burdens that the older generation has given them. It is hurting so much that it is
better to forget all about it. But by forgetting it, you cannot remove it.
      By forgetting a cancer, you cannot operate upon it. By not recognizing it, keeping it in
the dark, you are taking the greatest unnecessary risk against yourself. It will go on growing.
It needs darkness; it needs you to not know about it. It will cover up your whole being sooner
or later. And nobody else will be responsible for it except you.
      So if you feel that you are having glimpses, a few windows are opening in you.
      "Receptiveness feels like dying to me ..." Have you ever thought about it?
Receptiveness feels like dying to you—-it is true. Receptive-ness feels like dying because
receptiveness looks like humiliation. To receive something, particularly love, means you are
a beggar. Nobody wants to be on the receiving end because that makes you inferior to the
giver. "Receptiveness feels like dying to me, and automatically everything inside goes on red
alert."
      This red alert is implanted in you by the society that you have always respected, by the
same people you have thought were your well-wishers. And I don't say that they are
intentionally trying to harm you. They have been harmed by others, and they are simply
transferring whatsoever they have received from their parents, from their teachers, from the
older generation.
      Each generation goes on giving its diseases to the new generation, and naturally the
new generation becomes more and more burdened. You are the inheritor of all the
superstitious, repressive concepts of the whole of history. What goes on red alert is not
something that belongs to you. It is your conditioning that goes on red alert. And your last




                                                162
                          On The Way To Intimacy: Responses To Questions

sentence is just an effort to find a rationalization for it. That is also one of the great dangers
everybody has to be aware of.
     Don't rationalize.
     Go to the very root of every problem.
     But don't find excuses because if you find excuses, you cannot remove those roots.
     The last statement of the questioner is a rationalization. Perhaps she has not been able
to see its intrinsic quality. She says, "Help! Existence seems so huge."
     Now she is thinking that she is afraid of receiving because existence is so huge, that she
is afraid of giving because existence is so huge. What is the point of giving your small love,
just like a dewdrop, to the ocean? The ocean will never know about it; hence there is no
point in giving and there is no point in receiving, either. Because the ocean is so huge, you
will be drowned in it. Hence it looks like death. But this is your rationalization.
     You don't know anything about existence; you don't know anything about yourself—
which is the closest point of existence to you. Unless you start from your own being, you
will never know existence. That is the starting point, and everything has to begin from the
very beginning.
     Knowing yourself, you will know your existence. But the taste and the fragrance of
your existence will give you courage to go a little deeper into the existence of others. If your
own existence has made you so blissful, it is a natural longing to enter into other mysteries
that surround you: human mysteries, mysteries of the animals, mysteries of the trees,
mysteries of the stars.
     And once you have known your existence, you are no longer afraid of death.



                                                163
                                           Intimacy

     Death is a fiction; it does not happen, it only appears. It appears from the outside. Have
you ever seen your own death? You have always seen somebody else dying. But have you
seen yourself dying? Nobody has; otherwise even this minimum of life would become im-
possible. You see, every day somebody dies, but it is always somebody else; it is never you.
     The poet who wrote "Never ask for whom the bell tolls; it tolls for thee" has a deeper
understanding than you. He must have been a Christian because when somebody dies in a
Christian village, the church bell rings to inform everybody—people who have gone to their
farms, to their orchards, people who have gone to work somewhere. The church bell reminds
them: Somebody has died. So they all have to come back to give the last farewell.
     But the poet has a tremendous insight when he says, "Never ask for whom the bell tolls.
It tolls for thee."
     In your actual life it never rings for thee. One day it will ring, but then you will no
longer be here to hear it. You never think of yourself at the threshold of death—and
everybody is standing on the threshold. You always see somebody else dying, hence the
experience is objective, not subjective.
     The other is not really dying, only changing houses. His life force is moving into a new
form, into a new plane. Only the body is left without life energy—but the body never had it.
      It is just like in a dark house when a candle is burning and the whole house is lit. Even
from the outside you can see the light from the windows, from the doors, but the house does
not have the light as an intrinsic part of it. The moment the candle finishes, the house will be
in darkness. In fact, it has always been in darkness; it was the candle that was the light.
     Your body is already dead. What gives you the impression that it


                                               164
                         On The Way To Intimacy: Responses To Questions

is alive is your life force, your being, which radiates through the body, which fills the body
with aliveness. All that you have seen when people die is that something has disappeared.
You don't know where it has gone—whether it has actually gone anywhere or simply ceased
to be. So from the outside the fiction of death has been created.
     Those who have known themselves know without any doubt that they are eternal
beings. They have died many times, yet they are alive.
     Death and birth are only small episodes in the great pilgrimage of the soul. Your fear of
death will disappear immediately the moment you come in contact with yourself. And that
opens up a totally new sky to be explored. Once you know that there is no death, all fear
disappears. The fear of the unknown, the fear of the dark . . . whatever the form, all fears
disappear. You start for the first time being a real adventurer. You start moving into different
mysteries that surround you.
     Existence becomes for the first time your home.
     There is nothing to be feared: It is your mother; you are part of it. It cannot drown you,
it cannot destroy you.
     The more you know it, the more you will feel nourished; the more you know it, the
more you will feel blessed; the more you know it, the more you will be. Then you can give
love because you have it. And then you can receive love because there is no question of
rejection.
     Your question will be helpful to everybody. I thank you for your question and for your
courage to expose yourself. This courage is needed by everyone because without this
courage, you cannot hope for any possibility of transformation—into a new world, into a
new consciousness, into your authentic being, which is the door to ultimate reality and to
ultimate benediction.
                                              165
                                          Intimacy


What is the real answer to living in intimacy?


To know existence, you have to be existential. You are not existential, you live in thoughts.
You live in the past, in the future, but never here and now. And existence is right here now.
You are not here, hence the question arises. The question arises because of you not meeting
with existence. You think you live, but you don't live. You think you love, but you don't love.
You only think about love, you think about life, you think about existence, and that very
thinking is the question, that thinking is a barrier. Drop all thoughts and see. You will not
find a single question; only the answer exists.
     That's why I insist again and again that the search is not really for the answer, the
search is not really so that your questions can be answered. No, the search is only about how
to drop the questions, how to see life and existence with a nonquestioning mind. That is the
meaning of shraddha, trust. This is the deepest dimension of shraddha or trust—you look at
existence with a nonquestioning mind.
     You simply look. You have no idea how to look at it, you don't impose any form on it,
you don't have any prejudice; you simply look with naked eyes, absolutely uncovered by any
thoughts, any philosophies, any religions. You look at existence with eyes like a small child,
and then suddenly there is only the answer.
     There are no questions in existence. Questions come from you. And they will go on
coming, and you can go on accumulating as many answers as you like; those answers won't
help. You have to attain to the answer—and to attain to the answer, you have to drop all
questioning. When there is no question in the mind, the vision is clear, you have a clarity of
perception; the doors of perception are clean and open, and everything suddenly becomes
transparent. You can go to




                                              166
                       On The Way To Intimacy: Responses To Questions



the very depth. Wherever you look, your look penetrates to the deepest core—and there
suddenly you find yourself.
     You find yourself everywhere. You will find yourself in a rock if you look deep, deep
enough. Then the looker, the observer, becomes the observed, the seer becomes the seen, the
knower becomes the known. If you look deep enough in a rock, in a tree, or in a man or in a
woman, if you go on looking deeply, that look is a circle. It starts from you, then passes
through the other and comes back to you. Everything is so transparent. Nothing hinders. The
ray goes, becomes a circle, and falls back on you.
     Hence one of the greatest secret sentences of the Upanishads: Tat Twamasi Swetaketu:
"Thou art that" or "That art thou." The circle is complete. Now the devotee is one with God.
Now the seeker is one with the sought. Now the inquirer himself becomes the answer.
     In existence there is no question. I have lived in it long enough now, and I haven't
come across a single question—not even a fragment of a question. One simply lives it.
Then life has a beauty of its own. No doubt arises in the mind, no suspicion surrounds you,
no question exists within your being— you are undivided, whole.




                                             167
O          sho's teachings defy categorization, covering everything from the individual quest
           for meaning to the most urgent social and political issues facing society today. His
           books are not written but are transcribed from audio and video recordings of
extemporaneous talks given to international audiences over a period of 35 years. Osho has
been described by the Sunday Times in London as one of the "1000 Makers of the 20th
Century" and by American author Tom Robbins as "the most dangerous man since Jesus
Christ."
     About his own work Osho has said that he is helping to create the conditions for the
birth of a new kind of human being. He has often characterized this new human being as
"Zorba the Buddha" — capable of enjoying both the earthy pleasures of a Zorba the Greek
and the silent serenity of a Gautam Buddha. Running like a thread through all aspects of
Osho's work is a vision that encompasses both the timeless wisdom of the East and the
highest potential of Western science and technology.
     Osho is also known for his revolutionary contribution to the science of inner
transformation, with an approach to meditation that acknowledges the accelerated pace of
contemporary life. His unique "Active Meditations" are designed to first release the
accumulated stresses of body and mind, so that it is easier to experience the thought-free and
relaxed state of meditation. Two autobiographical works by the author are available:
Autobiography of a Spiritually Incorrect Mystic, St. Martins Press, ISBN 0-312-28071-8
Glimpses of a Golden Childhood, The Rebel Publishing House, India, ISBN 8172610726




                                             169
The osho Meditation Resort is a great place for holidays and a place where people can
have a direct personal experience of a new way of living with more alertness,
relaxation, and fun. Located about 100 miles southeast of Mumbai in Pune, India, the
resort offers a variety of programs to thousands of people who visit each year from
more than 100 countries around the world. Originally developed as a summer retreat
for maharajas and wealthy British colonialists, Pune is now a thriving modern city
that is home to a number of universities and high-tech industries. The Meditation
Resort spreads over 40 acres in a tree-lined suburb known as Koregaon Park. The
resort campus provides accommodation for a limited number of guests in a new
Guesthouse, and there is a plentiful variety of nearby hotels and private apartments
available for stays of a few days up to several months.
Resort programs are all based in the Osho vision of a qualitatively new kind of human
being who is able both to participate creatively in everyday life and to relax into
silence and meditation. Most programs




                                         171
                                 Meditation Resort

take place in modern, air-conditioned facilities and include a variety of sessions, courses, and
workshops covering everything from creative arts to holistic health treatments, personal
transformation and therapy, esoteric sciences, the "Zen" approach to sports and recreation,
relationship issues, and significant life transitions for men and women. Individual sessions
and group workshops are offered throughout the year, alongside a full daily schedule of
meditations. Outdoor cafes and restaurants within the resort grounds serve both traditional
Indian fare and a choice of international dishes, all made with organically grown vegetables
from the resorts own farm. The campus has its own private supply of safe, filtered water. For
more Meditation Resort information, see: www.osho.com/resort.


For information: www.osho.com


a comprehensive web site in several languages. More information about OSHO®
Meditations: www.osho.com/meditation, with video instruction for the OSHO® ACTIVE
MEDITATIONS and a large section of Frequently Asked Questions about meditation.
