ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Osho’s teachings defy categorization, covering everything from the individual quest for meaning to the most urgent social and political issues facing society today. His books are not written but are transcribed from audio and video recordings of extemporaneous talks given to international audiences over a period of thirty-five years. Osho has been described by the London Sunday Times as one of the “1000 Makers of the 20th Century” and by American author Tom Robbins as “the most dangerous man since Jesus Christ.”

About his own work Osho has said that he is helping to create the conditions for the birth of a new kind of human being. He has often characterized this new human being as “Zorba the Buddha”—capable both of enjoying the earthy pleasures of a Zorba the Greek and the silent serenity of a Gautam Buddha. Running like a thread through all aspects of Osho’s work is a vision that encompasses both the timeless wisdom of the East and the highest potential of Western science and technology.

Osho is also known for his revolutionary contribution to the science of inner transformation, with an approach to meditation that acknowledges the accelerated pace of contemporary life. His unique “Active Meditations” are designed to first release the accumulated stresses of body and mind, so that it is easier to experience the thought-free and relaxed state of meditation.





OSHO INTERNATIONAL MEDITATION RESORT

The Osho Meditation Resort is a place where people can have a direct personal experience of a new way of living with more alertness, relaxation, and fun. Located about 100 miles southeast of Mumbai in Pune, India, the resort offers a variety of programs to thousands of people who visit each year from more than one hundred countries around the world.

Originally developed as a summer retreat for Maharajas and wealthy British colonials, Pune is now a thriving modern city that is home to a number of universities and high-tech industries. The Meditation Resort spreads over forty acres in a tree-lined suburb known as Koregaon Park. The resort campus provides accommodation for a limited number of guests, and there is a plentiful variety of hotels nearby and private apartments available for stays of a few days up to several months.

Resort programs are all based in the Osho vision of a qualitatively new kind of human being who is able both to participate creatively in everyday life and to relax into silence and meditation. Most programs take place in modern, air-conditioned facilities and include a variety of individual sessions, courses, and workshops covering everything from creative arts to holistic health treatments, personal transformation and therapy, esoteric sciences, the Zen approach to sports and recreation, relationship issues, and significant life transitions for men and women. Individual sessions and group workshops are offered throughout the year, alongside a full daily schedule of meditations.

Outdoor cafes and restaurants within the resort grounds serve both traditional Indian fare and a choice of international dishes, all made with organically grown vegetables from the commune’s own farm. The campus has its own private supply of safe, filtered water.

See www.osho.com/resort for more information, including travel tips, course schedules, and guesthouse bookings.





FOR MORE INFORMATION

about Osho and his work, see:

www.osho.com

a comprehensive Web site in several languages that includes an online tour of the Meditation Resort and a calendar of its course offerings, a catalog of books and tapes, a list of Osho information centers worldwide, and selections from Osho’s talks.

Or contact:

Osho International

New York e-mail: oshointernational@oshointernational.com





More OSHO Books

INSIGHTS FOR A NEW WAY OF LIVING SERIES

Awareness

Compassion

Courage

Creativity

Freedom

Intelligence

Intimacy

Intuition

Joy

Maturity

OTHER BOOKS

Emotional Wellness

The Book of Understanding

Autobiography of a Spiritually Incorrect Mystic

The Book of Secrets

Pharmacy for the Soul

Love, Freedom, Aloneness

Meditation: The First and Last Freedom

Sex Matters

Your Answers Questioned

Osho Transformation Tarot

Osho Zen Tarot

Tao: The Pathless Path

Zen: The Path of Paradox

Yoga: The Science of the Soul

Tarot in the Spirit of Zen

Meditation for Busy People

Body Mind Balancing

The ABC of Enlightenment

AUDIO

Book of Secrets: Keys to Love and Meditation

Ah, This! The Heart Sutra

Osho Meditations on Buddhism

Osho Meditations on Tantra

Osho Meditations on Tao

Osho Meditations on Yoga

Osho Meditations on Zen





Copyright © 2008 by Osho International Foundation, Switzerland

All rights reserved.

Published in the United States by Harmony Books, an imprint of the Crown Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York.

www.crownpublishing.com

Harmony Books is a registered trademark and the Harmony Books colophon is a trademark of Random House, Inc.

OSHO is a registered trademark of Osho International Foundation, used with permission/license.

The material in this book is selected from various discourses by Osho given to a live audience. All of the Osho discourses have been published in full as books and are also available as original audio recordings. Audio recordings and the complete text archive can be found via the online OSHO Library at www.osho.com.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Osho, 1931–1990.

Being in love: how to love with awareness and relate without fear / Osho.—1st ed.

p. cm.

1. Love—Religious aspects. I. Title.

BP605.R34B445 2008

299'.93—dc22 2007036736

eISBN: 978-0-307-40988-1

v3.0





