The human equation was always meant to be like this: to move from being to doing to having.This means we were never meant to act in order to find fulfillment. Fulfillment was seen as an inner condition. It could not be pursued externally. We act in order to express our fulfillment, not to acquire it. We act in order to celebrate our inner completeness, not to pursue it.

				For most people, however, this simple equation is reversed.

				Most people do in order to be. They act because they feel incomplete. Their action is prompted by a desire to acquire something or to enhance their identity in some way.

				
SADHANA


If you are experiencing deep emotional stress, a simple practice is to remain as far as possible in a posture where your spine is erect. The lumber region in particular needs to be relaxed and stretched to activate the spine. If you are able to squat for lengths of time, this is particularly beneficial because the extension of the spine has a profound impact on psychological well-being.

A natural upsurge of energy will happen if you keep your feet together when you squat. But not many people can do this. So the next best option is to widen the distance between the feet when you squat, keeping your feet in line with your shoulders. Make sure your feet are firmly upon the ground.

 					This is not just an exercise. The spine is not merely a collection of bones. It is the very basis of communication and perception within the human system. Keeping it in optimal condition will not just revitalize and rejuvenate the body but will make a phenomenal difference in your mental and emotional life and the way you function.

There is a more comprehensive seven-step practice called the Yoga Namaskar, which is offered free of charge on the Sadhguru app (isha.sadhguru.org/​app). This is a powerful process of activating and strengthening the spine and the muscles alongside it, so as one ages, the spinal system does not collapse and the nerves are not pinched. If there is already spinal damage, this is a good way to regenerate the spine and ensure all-around benefits for the entire body. This is also a more scientific approach to unblocking emotional impasses in the human system and promoting what we call chitta vritti nirodha—the liberation of consciousness from fluctuations and bottlenecks.

